\section{Requirements}
\label{section:requirements}

The requirements for our software stem from the growing need for parallel
analysis in the domain of climate science\cite{MODSIM07:LOT} but also from
the use of the geodesic grid.

\subsection{Geodesic Grid}
\label{subsection:grid}

Until recently, climate and weather models have primarily been simulated on
structured grids that divide the latitude and longitude axes in even
increments, resulting in logically structured simulation grids.  Standard
conventions for describing this data in the NetCDF data model have been
formalized by the Climate and Forecast (CF) conventions\cite{CF}.  CF defines
conventions and metadata standards that enable both human and computer
interpretation of the data.  Human interpretation is supported through the use
of standard names while definition of spatial and temporal properties of the
data have enabled an extensive set of tools for data manipulation and display
such as \cite{NCO}, \cite{OPeNDAP}, and \cite{FERRET}.  The CF Conventions
have been evolving to support many variations of structured grids including
Orthographic, Polar stereographic, Transverse Mercator, and many others. 

The GCRM uses a geodesic grid.  The geodesic grid is created by recursively
bisecting an icosahedron of 20 triangular faces and twelve vertices and
projecting the resulting faces onto a unit sphere.  The resulting vertices
represent the centers of hexagonal grid cells with the exception of twelve
pentagons (the centers of the original twelve vertices.) See Fig.
\ref{fig:geodesic} for an example of the first stage of bisection and
projection, followed by the definition of one of the hexagons.  Further
details can be found in \cite{GEODESIC}.

\begin{figure}[!t]
\center
\includegraphics[width=3.5in]{images/geodesic2}
\caption{The geodesic grid is created by recursively bisecting an icosahedron
of 20 triangular faces and 12 vertices and projecting the resulting faces on
to a unit sphere.  The first recursion and a sample hexagonal cell can be seen
here.}
\label{fig:geodesic}
\end{figure}

From the previous description, it can be seen that the geodesic grid used by
the GCRM is fairly regular.  However, the horizontal dimension has some
important properties in common with unstructured grids: the grid coordinates
are not monotonic and simple conventions are not available for identifying the
neighbors of all cells.  As a consequence, it is necessary provide more
information about the topology of the grid.  Other unstructured grids such as
triangular, cubed sphere \cite{CUBE}, and arbitrary unstructured polygons are
also being applied to various models.  There is a recognized need to extend
the CF conventions to unstructured grids so that general data analysis,
regridding, and display tools can be developed.  As yet, no such standard
exists.  Lacking a standard, development of general purpose tools has been
slowed.  However some preliminary tools and approaches have progressed by
focusing on the in-memory operations and abstracting the data loading from the
processing \cite{UGRID}. 

Although the geodesic grid is fairly structured, we choose to represent it in
an unstructured way.  Each of the grid's cells, corners, and edges are
uniquely indexed from zero.  For a given positive integer $R$, there are $N =
10 \times 2^{2R} + 2$ cells, $C = (N-2) \times 2$ corners, and $E = (N-2)
\times 3$ edges.  Increasing the value of $R$ increases the resolution of the
model.  For example, a value of $R=10$ is approximately 8 kilometers while
$R=11$ is approximately 4 kilometers.  The number of cells, corners, and edges
are represented as dimensions within a NetCDF file.

The horizontal topology describes the connectivity relationships between
cells, nodes, and edges, all of which may have associated 3D data.  The
topology consists of three primary arrays: a mapping between cells and cell
corners, a mapping between cells and cell edges, and a mapping between edges
and corners.  Because neighbor lists are important for visualization programs
but difficult to generate in the general case, they are included as part of
the topology as the \verb+cell_neighbors(cells,neighbors=6)+ variable.  The
full list of topology variables include:

\begin{itemize}
\item \verb+cell_neighbors(cells,neighbors=6)+,
\item \verb+cell_corners(cells,cellcorners=6)+,
\item \verb+cell_edges(cells,celledges=6)+, and
\item \verb+edge_corners(edges,edgecorners=2)+
\end{itemize}

The vast majority of cells are hexagons which is why most of the last
dimensions are of size six except for the obvious case of \verb+edgecorners+.
For the twelve pentagons, the sixth value in these arrays are repeated but
could just have easily been set to a negative index and interpreted
appropriately.

The horizontal geometry describes the longitude and latitude location of each
object.  That is, there is one latitude and one longitude array for each of
the topology objects (cell centers, corners, and edges).

The vertical grid consists of layers sandwiched between interfaces with the
number of layers equal to the number of interfaces minus 1.   Because grid
variables are associated with both locations, layers and interfaces are
defined as dimensions.  They can be thought of as two distinct vertical grids
from a representation standpoint.

The data model is designed to support efficient model output, fully describe
the grid topology, and provide sufficient information for tessellation to
triangles for 3D visualization.  The approach taken with the model is to adopt
the CF conventions to the extent possible and adopt early ideas circulating
within the community.  However, as many of the details have not been decided,
custom data analysis tools are currently required.

\subsection{Data Parallelism}

Larson, Ong, and Tokarz note that the current popular climate data analysis
packages remain single-processor applications which lack the memory required
to handle large data volumes as well as the processing power to analyse the
data in a timely fashion\cite{MODSIM07:LOT}.  Although they emphasize using
OpenMP as a first step toward parallism, we instead emphasize using a
distributed data model first.  Well designed communication libraries such as
the Message Passing Interface (MPI)\cite{MPI} may already take advantage of
shared-memory parallelism within a compute node or multi-core desktop
computer.

The data parallelism offered by libraries such as MPI or Global Arrays is
absolutely necessary to handle the size of data of modern climate models.  An
edge data variable of the geodesic grid at an approximate resolution of 4
kilometers and 100 levels is nearly $10 \times 2^{2 \times R} \times 3 \times
100 \times 4 \unit{bytes} \approx 50 \unit{gigabytes}$ in size, where $R=11$.
Even a modest number of these variables will surpass the memory available in
most desktop systems and even some small clusters.

\subsection{Fast IO}

For data of this size, efficiently reading from and writing to disk requires
the use of parallel IO libraries such as Parallel-NetCDF\cite{PNETCDF} or
HDF5/NetCDF4\cite{HDF5}\cite{NETCDF}, both of which are in turn built on top
of the MPI-IO libraries\cite{MPIIO}.  Currently, GCRM output is stored in
netCDF\cite{NETCDF} files, a format for storing array-oriented
machine-independent data.

\subsection{64bit Libraries}

64bit libraries are also required for the GCRM output at 4 kilometer
resolution.  At this resolution, the GCRM output already requires 64bit file
offsets.  At resolutions smaller than 4 kilometers, the GCRM output will begin
to produce edge variables that exceed the 4 byte limit for array indexing.

\subsection{Dataset Abstraction}

Model output is often distributed across many files for a given model run.
There are any number of schemes for organizing so many files e.g. one variable
per file with multiple timesteps per file, separating out the grid into a
separate file, one timestep per file with multiple variables.  The
reconstitution of these files into a logical set of variables and metadata is
an established practice\cite{NcML,THREDDS}.  We emphasize that the aggregation
of files into an abstract dataset is required in order to operate on the data
itself.  Operations on a dataset are more intuitive than needing to know the
addling details of which files hold which variables.

\subsection{Maintenance of Topology Variables}

\begin{figure}[!t]
\center
\includegraphics[width=3.5in]{images/Subset1}
\caption{Maintenance of Topology Variables and Integrity of Entire Grid Cells.
The hexagonal cells remain well-formed during extraction while the indices of
the corners are adjusted to reflect the fewer overall corners in the subset.}
\label{fig:subset}
\end{figure}

Regular grids such as the cartesian, rectilinear, or curvilinear lend
themselves to representations as multidimensional arrays such that logically
adjacent cells are either adjacent in memory or can be located via a
shape-based index calculation.  Although some attempt is made to keep
logically adjacent cells nearby in memory, geodesic grids do not have the
luxury of using relatively simple shape-based index arithmetic to locate
neighbors.

The topology variables mentioned in Section \ref{subsection:grid} are not
unique to our grid; any grid could be described using a similar set of
variables.  However, since topology is often implicitly defined by other
grids, these variables are not correctly handled by current software.  When a
subset occurs, the indices of these variables must be updated to reflect the
remaining corners, edges, and cells as seen in Fig. \ref{fig:subset}.

\subsection{Maintain Integrity of Entire Grid Cells}

Howe and Maier detail the properties of well-formed grids in \cite{UGRID}.
Proper subsets should maintain the same well-formed properties of the original
in order to remain useful to further analysis.  Therefore, the cell and its
surrounding corners and edges must remain intact during a subset as seen in
Fig. \ref{fig:subset}.
